Distinguish+expand Hot Spotting from Task Backlog (#4657)
elastic/docs-content: troubleshoot/elasticsearch/task-queue-backlog.md

% **Product:** Elasticsearch<br> **Deployment type:** Elastic Cloud % Enterprise, Elastic Cloud Hosted, Elastic Cloud on Kubernetes, Elastic
% Self-Managed <br> **Versions:** All

A backlogged task queue can lead to [rejected requests](/troubleshoot/elasticsearch/rejected-requests.md) or an [unhealthy cluster state](/troubleshoot/elasticsearch/red-yellow-cluster-status.md). Contributing factors include [uneven or resource constrained hardware](/troubleshoot/elasticsearch/hotspotting.md#causes-hardware), a large number of tasks triggered at once, expensive tasks using [high CPU](/troubleshoot/elasticsearch/high-cpu-usage.md) or inducing [high JVM](/troubleshoot/elasticsearch/high-jvm-memory-pressure.md), and long-running tasks.

## Diagnose a backlogged task queue [diagnose-task-queue-backlog] 

To identify the cause of the backlog, try these diagnostic actions.

* [Check thread pool status](#diagnose-task-queue-thread-pool)

> * [Inspect node hot threads](#diagnose-task-queue-hot-thread)

Author: That's fair. I was trying to get the TOC to stop line-overflowing & then afterwards was trying to surface that you care if any threads are caught regardless of if individual node related. But TBF I don't feel overly strongly, I probably just got caught away with edits.

* [Identify long-running node tasks](#diagnose-task-queue-long-running-node-tasks)
* [Look for long-running cluster tasks](#diagnose-task-queue-long-running-cluster-tasks)

### Check thread pool status [diagnose-task-queue-thread-pool] 

Use the [cat thread pool API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-cat-thread-pool) to monitor active threads, queued tasks, rejections, and completed tasks:

```console
GET /_cat/thread_pool?v&s=t,n&h=type,name,node_name,active,queue,rejected,completed
```

> You will be checking for bottlenecks such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a number of things that you can check as potential causes for the queue backlog:
```

Some common `source` to look out for:

* `ilm-`: [ILM](/manage-data/lifecycle/index-lifecycle-management.md) polls every `10m` by default from setting [`indices.lifecycle.poll_interval`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/configuration-reference/index-lifecycle-management-settings.md). It kicks off asynchronous tasks executed by the node tasks. If ILM continually reports as a cluster pending task this setting was likely overrode else the cluster likely has misconfigured [indices count to master heap](/deploy-manage/production-guidance/optimize-performance/size-shards.md#shard-count-recommendation).
* `put-mapping`: {{es}} enables [dynamic mapping](/manage-data/data-store/mapping/dynamic-mapping.md) by default. This or the [update mapping API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-indices-put-mapping) triggers a mapping update. Correlating cluster log will contain `update_mapping` along with the effected index name.

> * `shard-started`: Indicates [active shard recoveries](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-cat-recovery). Overriding [`cluster.routing.allocation.*` settings](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/configuration-reference/cluster-level-shard-allocation-routing-settings.md#cluster-shard-allocation-settings) can cause this to back up.

Author: ```suggestion
* `shard-started`: Indicates [active shard recoveries](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-cat-recovery). Overriding [`cluster.routing.allocation.*` settings](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/configuration-reference/cluster-level-shard-allocation-routing-settings.md#cluster-shard-allocation-settings) can cause pending tasks and recoveries to back up.
```
